The Epistle to Diognetus
Translated by J. B. Lightfoot (1891)

Chapter 1
Occasion of the Epistle
1:1 Since I see, most excellent Diognetus, that thou art exceedingly anxious to understand the religion of the Christians, and that thy enquiries respecting them are distinctly and carefully made, as to what God they trust and how they worship Him, that they all disregard the world and despise death, and take no account of those who are regarded as gods by the Greeks, neither do they observe the superstition of the Jews; and what is the warm affection they have one towards another; and why this new race or practice has come into the world now and not before; I welcome this thy desire, and I ask of God, Who supplieth both the speaking and the hearing to us, that it may be granted to myself to speak in such a way that above all thou mayest be made better by hearing, and to thee so to hear that he who speaketh may not be embarrassed.

Chapter 2
The Vanity of Idols
2:1 Come then, clear thyself of all the prepossessions which occupy thy mind, and throw aside the custom which leadeth thee astray, and become as it were a new man from the beginning, as one about to listen also to a new discourse, even as thou thyself didst confess.
2:2 See not only with thine eyes, but with thine understanding also, what substance or what form they chance to have whom ye call and regard as gods.
2:3 Is not one of them stone, like that which is trodden under foot; and another bronze, no better than the vessels which are forged for our use; and another wood, already rotten; and another silver, needing a man to guard it lest it be stolen; and another iron, rusted with corrosion; and another earthenware, not a whit more comely than that which is supplied for the meanest service?
2:4 Are not all these of corruptible matter? Are they not forged by iron and fire? Did not the sculptor form one, and the brazier another, and the silversmith another, and the potter another?
2:5 Before they were shaped by the skills of these workmen into the forms which they have, was it not possible for each of them to have been transformed and still to be transformed into different things? Might not the vessels which are now made out of the same material, if they met with the same artificers, be made like unto such as these?
2:6 Again, could not these which are now worshipped by you be made by men into vessels like the rest? Are they not dumb? Are they not blind? Are they not without life? Are they not without feeling? Are they not without motion? Do they not all rot? Are they not all corruptible?
2:7 These things ye call gods; these ye serve; these ye worship; and ye become eventually like unto them.
2:8 For this reason ye hate the Christians, because they do not consider these to be gods.
2:9 For do not ye yourselves, who now regard and worship them, much more despise them? Do ye not much rather mock and insult them, in that ye worship the stone and earthenware ones without putting a guard over them, but the silver and gold ones ye shut up by night and set watchers over them by day, lest they be stolen?
2:10 And by the honours which ye think to offer them, if they are sensible of them, ye rather punish them; whereas, if they are insensible, ye expose them to shame by worshipping them with blood and burnt fat.
2:11 Let one of yourselves endure this! Let one of you permit these things to be done to him! But not a single man would willingly suffer this punishment, for he has sensation and reason; but the stone suffereth it, for it is insensible. Do ye not then convict their insensibility?
2:12 Well, I could say much else concerning the Christians not being in bondage to such gods as these; but if even what hath been said should not seem to any one sufficient, I deem it superfluous to say more.

Chapter 3
Superstitions of the Jews
3:1 In the next place I think that thou art especially anxious to hear about their not practising their religion in the same way as the Jews.
3:2 The Jews then, in that they abstain from the kind of service above described, do indeed properly claim to worship the one God of the universe and to acknowledge Him as Master; but in that they offer this service to Him in like manner with those aforesaid, they are entirely in error.
3:3 For while the Greeks provide an example of their own folly by offering these things to insensible and deaf objects, these persons, thinking that they are presenting them to the God of the universe as if He were in need of them, ought rather to consider it folly and not religious worship.
3:4 For He that made the heaven and the earth and all things that are therein, and supplieth each of us with that which we need, cannot Himself need any of those things which He Himself provideth to those who imagine that they are giving them.
3:5 But those who think to perform sacrifices to Him with blood and fat and whole burnt offerings, and to honour Him with these honours, seem to me in no way to differ from those who show the same respect to deaf objects, who cannot enjoy the honour; while the others think to offer anything to Him Who hath no need of anything.

Chapter 4
The Other Jewish Observances
4:1 But again, as to their scrupulosity concerning meats, and their superstition as to the sabbath, and the vainglory of their circumcision, and the pretentiousness of their fastings and new moons, which are ridiculous and unworthy of consideration, I do not suppose that thou needest to learn from me.
4:2 For to accept some of the things made by God for man's use as created good, and to refuse others as useless and superfluous, how can this be consistent with right?
4:3 And to speak falsely of God, as if He forbiddeth to do good on the sabbath day, how is not this profane?
4:4 And to boast of the mutilation of the flesh as a token of election, as if they were especially beloved by God on this account, how is it not a mockery?
4:5 And to watch the stars and the moon for the observance of months and days, and to distribute the arrangements of God and the changes of the seasons according to their own impulses, some for feasts and some for mourning, who would consider this a mark of piety and not rather of foolishness?
4:6 Therefore that the Christians are right in holding aloof from the common vanity and error, and from the excessive fussiness and pride of the Jews, I consider that thou hast been sufficiently instructed; but as to the mystery of their own religion, do not expect to be able to learn it from man.

Chapter 5
The Manners of the Christians
5:1 For the Christians are distinguished from other men neither by country, nor language, nor the customs which they observe.
5:2 For they neither inhabit cities of their own, nor employ a peculiar form of speech, nor lead a life which is marked out by any singularity.
5:3 The course of conduct which they follow has not been devised by any speculation or deliberation of inquisitive men; nor do they, like some, proclaim themselves the advocates of any human doctrine.
5:4 But, inhabiting Greek as well as barbarian cities, according as the lot of each of them has determined, and following the customs of the natives in respect to clothing, food, and the rest of their ordinary conduct, they display to us their wonderful and confessedly striking method of life.
5:5 They dwell in their own countries, but simply as sojourners. As citizens, they share in all things with others, and yet endure all things as if foreigners. Every foreign land is to them as their native country, and every land of their birth as a land of strangers.
5:6 They marry, as do all; they beget children; but they do not destroy their offspring.
5:7 They have a common table, but not a common bed.
5:8 They are in the flesh, but they do not live after the flesh.
5:9 They pass their days on earth, but they are citizens of heaven.
5:10 They obey the prescribed laws, and at the same time surpass the laws by their lives.
5:11 They love all men, and are persecuted by all.
5:12 They are unknown and condemned; they are put to death, and restored to life.
5:13 They are poor, yet make many rich; they are in lack of all things, and yet abound in all;
5:14 they are dishonoured, and yet in their very dishonour are glorified. They are evil spoken of, and yet are justified;
5:15 they are reviled, and bless; they are insulted, and repay the insult with honour;
5:16 they do good, yet are punished as evil-doers. When punished, they rejoice as if quickened into life;
5:17 they are assailed by the Jews as foreigners, and are persecuted by the Greeks; yet those who hate them are unable to assign any reason for their hatred.

Chapter 6
The Relation of Christians to the World
6:1 To sum up all in one word — what the soul is in the body, that the Christians are in the world.
6:2 The soul is dispersed through all the members of the body, and Christians are scattered through all the cities of the world.
6:3 The soul dwells in the body, yet is not of the body; and Christians dwell in the world, yet are not of the world.
6:4 The invisible soul is guarded by the visible body, and Christians are known indeed to be in the world, but their godliness remaineth invisible.
6:5 The flesh hates the soul, and wars against it, though itself suffering no injury, because it is prevented from enjoying pleasures; the world also hates the Christians, though in nowise injured, because they abjure pleasures.
6:6 The soul loves the flesh that hates it, and the members; so Christians love those that hate them.
6:7 The soul is enclosed in the body, yet itself holdeth the body together; and Christians are kept in the world as in a prison-house, yet they themselves hold the world together.
6:8 The immortal soul dwells in a mortal tabernacle; and Christians dwell in the passing things of corruption, looking for the incorruption which is in heaven.
6:9 The soul, when ill-provided with food and drink, becometh better; in like manner, the Christians, though subjected to day by day punishment, increase the more in number.
6:10 God hath assigned them this illustrious position, which it were unlawful for them to forsake.

Chapter 7
The Manifestation of Christ
7:1 For, as I said, this is no earthly invention which was committed to them, nor is it a mortal thought which they deem worthy of being so carefully preserved, nor is it a dispensation of human mysteries that is entrusted to them.
7:2 But truly the Almighty, the All-creator, and the Invisible God Himself from heaven planted among men the Truth and the Holy and Incomprehensible Word, and firmly established Him in their hearts; not as one might imagine, by sending some subordinate unto men, or an angel, or a ruler, or one of those that manage earthly things, or one of those to whom the government of things in heaven is committed, but the very Artificer and Creator of the universe Himself, by Whom He made the heavens, by Whom He enclosed the sea within its proper bounds, Whose ordinances all the stars faithfully observe, from Whom the sun received the measure of the courses of the day to keep them, Whose bidding the moon obeys when He bids her shine by night, Whom the stars obey as they follow the course of the moon, by Whom all things are ordered and defined and placed in subjection, the heavens and the things that are in the heavens, the earth and the things that are in the earth, the sea and the things that are in the sea, fire, air, the abyss, the things that are in the heights, the things that are in the depths, and the things that are between.
7:3 Him He sent unto them. Was it then, as one might suppose, for tyranny or to inspire terror and amazement?
7:4 By no means, but in gentleness and meekness He sent Him, as a king sending a son who is a king, He sent Him as God, He sent Him as unto men, He sent Him as saving, as persuading, not as using violence; for violence is not an attribute of God.
7:5 He sent Him as calling, not as pursuing; He sent Him as loving, not as judging.
7:6 For He will send Him as Judge, and who shall abide the day of His coming?
7:7 Dost thou not see them thrown to the wild beasts, that they may deny the Lord, and not being overcome?
7:8 Dost thou not see that the more of them are punished, the greater becomes the number of the rest?
7:9 These things seem not like the works of a man; they are the power of God; they are the proofs of His presence.

Chapter 8
The State of the World Before the Son
8:1 For who among men understood what God is at all before He came?
8:2 Or dost thou accept the vain and silly doctrines of those who are deemed trustworthy philosophers, whereof some said that fire was God (calling that God to which they themselves are about to go), and others water, and others some other of the elements created by God?
8:3 And yet if any of these arguments is acceptable, each of the remaining creatures also might in like manner be declared God.
8:4 But these things are the charlatanry and deception of the magicians;
8:5 and no man hath either seen Him or known Him, but He Himself manifested Himself.
8:6 And He manifested Himself through faith, by which alone it is given to see God.
8:7 For God, the Master and Creator of the universe, Who made all things, and arranged them in order, was not only friendly to man, but also long-suffering.
8:8 But such He was always, and is, and will be: kind and good and free from anger and true; and He alone is good.
8:9 And having conceived a great and unutterable conception, He communicated it to His Son alone.
8:10 As long then as He held and kept His wise counsel in secret, He seemed to disregard us and to have no care for us.
8:11 But when He revealed and laid bare through His beloved Son the things which had been prepared from the beginning, He granted us all things at once, both to partake of His benefits and to see and understand things which none of us could ever have expected.

Chapter 9
The Reason for the Delay of the Incarnation
9:1 Having therefore arranged everything already in His own mind with His Son, during the former time He suffered us to be carried about by disordered impulses as we willed, being overcome by pleasures and lusts; not that He in any way took pleasure in our sins, but that He suffered them; nor that He approved of the time of iniquity that then was, but that He was creating the present season of righteousness, that being convicted in the past time through our own deeds as unworthy of life, we might now also be made worthy by the goodness of God; and having made it manifest that we were unable of ourselves to enter into the kingdom of God, we might be enabled by the power of God.
9:2 But when our wickedness had reached its height, and it had been clearly shown that its reward, punishment and death, was to be looked for, and the time came which God had purposed to manifest His own goodness and power (O the surpassing kindness and love of God!), He did not hate us, nor reject us, nor bear us a grudge, but was long-suffering and bore with us; He Himself in pity took our sins upon Himself, He Himself gave His own Son as a ransom for us, the holy One for the lawless, the innocent One for the wicked, the righteous One for the unrighteous, the incorruptible One for the corruptible, the immortal One for the mortal.
9:3 For what else could cover our sins but His righteousness?
9:4 In whom was it possible for us, the lawless and ungodly, to be justified, except in the Son of God alone?
9:5 O the sweet exchange, O the unsearchable work of God, O the benefits surpassing all expectation, that the wickedness of many should be covered in the one righteous Man, and the righteousness of the One should justify many lawless men!
9:6 Having then in the former time proved the inability of our nature to attain life, and having now revealed the Saviour who is able to save even what was impossible to be saved, by both these things He willed that we should trust His goodness, and consider Him as Provider, Father, Teacher, Counsellor, Physician, Mind, Light, Honour, Glory, Strength, Life; and that we should not be anxious about clothing and food.

Chapter 10
The Blessings That Flow from Faith
10:1 If thou also desirest to attain to this faith, attain first to the knowledge of the Father.
10:2 For God loved mankind, for whose sake He made the world, to whom He subjected all the things that are on earth, to whom He gave reason and understanding, to whom alone He gave permission to look upward to Him, whom He made after His own image, to whom He sent His only-begotten Son, to whom He promised the kingdom in heaven, and will give it to those that have loved Him.
10:3 And when thou hast known Him, with what joy thinkest thou that thou wilt be filled, or how wilt thou love Him Who so first loved thee?
10:4 And when thou lovest Him, thou wilt become an imitator of His kindness. And marvel not that a man can be an imitator of God. He can, if God willeth it.
10:5 For happiness consisteth not in lordship over one's neighbours, nor in wishing to have more than the weaker, nor in being wealthy and using force towards those who are inferior; not by these things can any one imitate God, but these things are outside His majesty.
10:6 But whosoever taketh upon himself the burden of his neighbour, whosoever in whatever respect he is superior is ready to benefit another who is deficient, whosoever by distributing to the needy that which he hath received from God becometh a god to those who receive his benefits, he is an imitator of God.
10:7 Then shalt thou see, though thou art upon earth, that God ruleth in heaven, then shalt thou begin to speak the mysteries of God, then shalt thou both love and admire those that are punished because they will not deny God; then shalt thou condemn the deception and error of the world, when thou hast known what it is to live truly in heaven, when thou canst despise that which is here called death, when thou fearest that which is truly death, which is reserved for those that shall be condemned to the eternal fire, which shall afflict those even to the end that are committed to it.
10:8 Then shalt thou admire those who for righteousness' sake endure the fire that is but for a moment, and shalt count them blessed, when thou hast known that fire!

Chapter 11
The Proclamation of the Word
11:1 These things I speak not of strange things, nor do I aim at novelties, but having been a disciple of the Apostles, I become a teacher of the Gentiles. The things that were handed down I minister worthily to those who are becoming disciples of the truth.
11:2 For who that is rightly taught and begotten by the loving Word would not seek to learn clearly the things that were shown openly by the Word to the disciples, to whom the Word appeared and revealed them, speaking with all plainness, not understood by unbelievers, but explained to disciples who, being accounted faithful by Him, knew the mysteries of the Father?
11:3 For this cause He sent the Word, that He might appear unto the world, Who, being despised by the people, was preached by the Apostles and believed on by the Gentiles.
11:4 This is He Who was from the beginning, Who appeared new and yet was found old, and is ever generated anew in the hearts of the saints.
11:5 This is the eternal One, Who today is accounted a Son, through Whom the Church is enriched, and grace is unfolded and multiplied among the saints, yielding understanding, revealing mysteries, announcing seasons, rejoicing over the faithful, giving to those that seek, by whom the pledges of faith are not broken, nor the boundaries of the fathers transgressed.
11:6 Then the fear of the Law is chanted, and the grace of the Prophets is known, and the faith of the Gospels is established, and the tradition of the Apostles is preserved, and the grace of the Church exulteth.
11:7 If thou grievest not this grace, thou shalt understand the things which the Word speaketh through whomsoever He chooseth, when He willeth.
11:8 For what things we were moved to utter with pain by the will of the Word that commandeth us, we communicate unto you from love of the things which have been revealed unto us.

Chapter 12
The Importance of Knowledge to True Spiritual Life
12:1 Which things if thou read and hear with earnestness, thou shalt know what things God provideth for those that love Him rightly, who are become a Paradise of delight, raising up in themselves a tree bearing all fruits and flourishing, and adorned with various fruits.
12:2 For in this place the tree of knowledge and the tree of life have been planted; but the tree of knowledge doth not destroy, but disobedience destroyeth.
12:3 For not without meaning are the things which were written of old, how God from the beginning planted the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, revealing through knowledge the way to life; which when those who were first formed did not use purely, they were left naked by the deceit of the serpent.
12:4 For neither is there life without knowledge, nor is there sound knowledge without true life; wherefore both are planted near together.
12:5 Which meaning the Apostle seeing, and blaming the knowledge which is exercised without the reality of the command which tendeth to life, saith, Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.
12:6 For he that thinketh he knoweth anything without true knowledge, and such as is witnessed to by life, knoweth nothing; he is deceived by the serpent, not having loved life. But he that hath with fear acquired knowledge and seeketh life planteth in hope, looking for fruit.
12:7 Let thy heart be knowledge, and thy life the true Word received into thy heart.
12:8 Bearing this tree and choosing its fruit, thou shalt ever reap those things which are desired by God, which the serpent toucheth not, neither doth deceit approach; neither is Eve corrupted, but she is believed on as a virgin;
12:9 and salvation is displayed, and Apostles are instructed, and the Passover of the Lord goeth forward, and the choirs are gathered together and arranged in order, and the Word rejoiceth as He teacheth the saints, through Whom the Father is glorified: to Whom be glory forever. Amen.
