The Catechetical Instructions: Part IV
The Lord's Prayer (Trans. Joseph B. Collins, 1939)
Translated by Rev. Joseph B. Collins, S.S. (1939)

Chapter 1
The Excellence, Dignity, and Five Qualities of Prayer
1:1 Prayer is the raising of the human mind and heart to God to praise Him, thank Him, and ask of Him fitting blessings.
1:2 The Lord's Prayer excels all other prayers in five supreme qualities: it is confident, ordered, suitable, devout, and humble.
1:3 It is confident because it was composed by our Advocate and Savior Jesus Christ, who assures us that the Father will grant whatever we ask in His name (John 16:23).
1:4 It is ordered because it places spiritual and eternal blessings before temporal needs; suitable because it asks only what is truly beneficial; devout because it stirs up filial love; and humble because it acknowledges our complete dependence upon divine grace.

Chapter 2
The Opening Invocation: Our Father Who Art in Heaven
2:1 The prayer opens with words that inspire profound trust and fraternal charity: "Our Father" (Matthew 6:9).
2:2 We say "Father" because God has adopted us as His sons through Christ; we say "Our" because all Christians are brethren in the household of faith.
2:3 The clause "Who art in heaven" directs our gaze upward to the eternal beatitude prepared for us, detachment from transient worldly vanities, and reverence for God's infinite majesty.

Chapter 3
The First Petition: Hallowed Be Thy Name
3:1 The first petition asks: "Hallowed be Thy name" (Matthew 6:9).
3:2 We pray that God's name may be praised, honored, and manifested in the lives and hearts of all men through true faith, good works, and holiness.
3:3 For when Christians live holy lives, men glorify our Father who is in heaven (Matthew 5:16).

Chapter 4
The Second Petition: Thy Kingdom Come
4:1 In the second petition we pray: "Thy kingdom come" (Matthew 6:10).
4:2 We ask that the kingdom of grace may reign within our hearts, delivering us from the dominion of sin and Satan.
4:3 We also pray for the glorious consummation of the kingdom of God in heaven, when the saints will reign with Christ forever in unending bliss.

Chapter 5
The Third Petition: Thy Will Be Done on Earth as It Is in Heaven
5:1 In the third petition we pray: "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven" (Matthew 6:10).
5:2 We ask that we may obey the divine commandments on earth with the same fervor and perfection as the blessed angels and saints in heaven.
5:3 We pray for patience in adversity and conformity of our will to the will of God in all occurrences of life.

Chapter 6
The Fourth Petition: Give Us This Day Our Daily Bread
6:1 In the fourth petition we pray: "Give us this day our daily bread" (Matthew 6:11).
6:2 We petition God for our daily bodily sustenance, learning contentment with what is necessary and avoiding greedy avarice (Proverbs 30:8).
6:3 We also petition for our spiritual food, which is the Word of God and the Most Holy Eucharist, without which our souls cannot live (John 6:51).

Chapter 7
The Fifth Petition: And Forgive Us Our Debts, As We Also Forgive Our Debtors
7:1 In the fifth petition we pray: "And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors" (Matthew 6:12).
7:2 We confess that we are sinners in need of daily divine mercy and remission of our offenses.
7:3 God places a condition upon our pardon: that we also forgive from the heart all those who have offended or injured us (Matthew 6:14-15).

Chapter 8
The Sixth and Seventh Petitions: Lead Us Not into Temptation, But Deliver Us from Evil
8:1 In the sixth petition we pray: "And lead us not into temptation" (Matthew 6:13), asking that God may not permit us to be overcome by the assaults of the world, the flesh, or the devil.
8:2 In the seventh petition we conclude: "But deliver us from evil" (Matthew 6:13), begging for deliverance from all present afflictions, past sins, future perils, and eternal death.
8:3 The word "Amen" signifies our firm assent and confident hope that our petitions will be heard and granted by our heavenly Father.
